IBX-10684: Document translation management (#3249)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/multisite/translations_management/configure_translations_management.md

```bash
composer require ibexa/translations-management
```

If you're installing Translations management LTS Update as part of the installation process of a fresh [[= product_name =]] instance, this step copies the migration files into the project's migrations directory, creates the database tables required for the review workflow, and adds the default action configurations in the database.
Otherwise follow the steps below.

### Existing installations

To add the Translations management LTS Update to an existing [[= product_name =]] instance, after installation, you must create database tables and action configurations yourself.

#### Modify database schema

Add the tables needed by the bundle:

=== "MySQL"

    ```sql
    [[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/install/schema.mysql.sql', indent_level=1) =]]
    ```

=== "PostgreSQL"

    ```sql
    [[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/install/schema.postgresql.sql', indent_level=1) =]]
    ```

The script creates the required data structures, but doesn't add any data to the database.

#### Add action configurations

> To complete the setup, import and run the AI Action Configuration migrations required by the AI connectors that you use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To complete the setup, import and run the AI Action Configuration migrations required by the [AI connectors](configure_ai_actions.md) that you use:
```

So that people can quickly see which ones are available + how to add them if needed.

I see you have the same link below, imho it's good to have a link on the first occurance as well

```bash
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_06_15_00_auto_translate_openai_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_11_10_00_auto_translate_gemini_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_12_08_30_auto_translate_anthropic_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:migrate
```

## Configure translation providers

Translation providers are the services that perform the actual text translation.

> If you fail to configure them, the automatic translation feature is disabled in the editor's UI, and a message is displayed that prompts the user to contact the administrator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you fail to configure them, the automatic translation feature is disabled in the editor's UI, and a message is displayed that prompts the user to contact the administrator.
```

The Translations management package comes with two types of translation services:

- REST API-based providers call a translation service such as Google Translate or DeepL directly by using an API key.
- AI-based providers send translation requests through the [AI Actions](configure_ai_actions.md) framework, relying on the same model selection and policy controls as other AI features in [[= product_name =]].

!!! note "Prerequisites for the default translation providers"

    Before you can configure translation providers, you must fulfill the following prerequisites:

    - For the REST API-based translation providers, add API keys that you obtain from the machine translation services to the `.env` file in the root directory of your project.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     - For the AI-based translation providers, [configure AI Actions](configure_ai_actions.md) and configure or install and configure their corresponding connectors.

Reviewer: > configure AI Actions and configure or install and configure their corresponding connectors.

this is a bit convoluted, could you simplify this?

                            apiKey: '%env(DEEPL_API_KEY)%'
                        openai:
                            actionConfigurationIdentifier: 'auto_translate_openai'
                        anthropic:
                            actionConfigurationIdentifier: 'auto_translate_anthropic'
                        gemini:
                            actionConfigurationIdentifier: 'auto_translate_gemini'
```

The `apiKey` values must reference API key values that you added to the `.env` file.
The `actionConfigurationIdentifier` values must reference existing Action Configurations.
If a value is missing or empty, the provider doesn't appear in the UI as a selectable option.

#### Advanced translation provider options

In addition to their required authentication keys, all providers support two optional ones:

- `supportedLanguageCodes` - overrides the default list of language codes that this provider accepts
- `languageCodesMap` - maps language codes used by [[= product_name =]], for example, `eng-GB`, to the provider-specific codes the API expects

REST API-based providers come with their own language code lists and mappings, therefore both settings are optional.

> If configured, they replace the built-in defaults, so use them to restrict available languages or override mappings.

Reviewer: Does it make sense to say how to preview the built-in default settings?

For example. you can see the default values by running:

``` bash
php bin/console debug:container --parameters | grep ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider
```

This returns:

```
  ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.deepl.language_codes_map                                         {"ZH_TW":"ZH-HANT","ZH_CN":"ZH-HANS","ZH_HK":"ZH-HANS","ZH":...
  ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.deepl.supported_language_codes                                   ["AR","BG","CS","DA","DE","EL","EN-GB","EN-US","ES","ET","FI...
  ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.google.language_codes_map                                        {"zh_CN":"zh-CN","zh_HK":"zh-CN","zh_TW":"zh-TW"}
  ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.google.supported_language_codes                                  ["af","sq","am","ar","hy","az","eu","be","bn","bs","bg","ca"...
  ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.validation_policies                                              {"openai":"ai_generic","google":"google","deepl":"deepl"}
```

> AI-based providers do not provide built-in language code lists or mappings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI-based providers don't provide built-in language code lists or mappings.
```

If `supportedLanguageCodes` is not configured, all enabled languages are used, converted to POSIX format.

> If `languageCodesMap` is not configured, the system automatically tries to match [[= product_name_base =]] language codes to the provider's API by trying different format variants, for example, `eng-GB` -> `en-GB` -> `en`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `languageCodesMap` is not configured, the system automatically tries to match [[= product_name =]] language codes to the one supported by the provider by trying different format variants, for example, `eng-GB`, `en-GB`, or `en`.
```

If no match is found, an `UnsupportedLanguageException` is thrown at runtime.

> Therefore, for AI-based providers, it is recommended that you explicitly bonfigure both options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, for AI-based providers, it is recommended that you explicitly configure both options.
```

---
description: Install translations management and configure translation providers, language pairs, and more.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Configure translations management

`ibexa/translations-management` extends [[= product_name =]]'s built-in language management tools that editors use for content item and product translation.
It introduces a plugin that handles automatic translations through the translation provider system by connecting to REST APIs and AI services.
By using the new [side-by-side editing interface](#side-by-side-translation-view), editors can compare source and target values, provide content item and product translations in a single view, and reject or approve translations.

> Multiple extension points exist that you can use to [customize different areas of the translation workflow](extend_translations_management.md).

Reviewer 2: Sounds better imo.
```suggestion
There are multiple extension points you can use to [customize different areas of the translation workflow](extend_translations_management.md).
```

!!! note "Translation limitations"

    The following limitations apply to automatic translation:
    
    - Content types that contain the `ibexa_form` or `ibexa_landing_page` fields don't support the side-by-side translation view and open in the single-language editor instead.
    - For `ibexa_landing_page` fields, translatable attributes of block content are sent to the translation provider, while layout, zones, and non-translatable block attributes are preserved. 
    - The value of `ibexa_form` field type is not translated.

    Also, [product attributes](products.md#product-attributes) remain non-translatable and are inactive in the side-by-side translation view.

## Install package

To install the Translations management [LTS Update](editions.md#lts-updates), run the following command:

```bash
composer require ibexa/translations-management
```

> If you're installing Translations management LTS Update as part of the installation process of a fresh [[= product_name =]] instance, this step copies the migration files into the project's migrations directory, creates the database tables required for the review workflow, and adds the default action configurations in the database.

Reviewer 2: Vale is right here - this sentence feels too long.

#### Add action configurations

To complete the setup, import and run the AI Action Configuration migrations required by the [AI connectors](configure_ai_actions.md) that you use:

```bash
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_06_15_00_auto_translate_openai_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_11_10_00_auto_translate_gemini_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_12_08_30_auto_translate_anthropic_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:migrate
```

## Configure translation providers

Translation providers are the services that perform the actual text translation.
If you fail to configure them, the automatic translation feature is disabled in the editor's UI, and a message is displayed that prompts the user to contact the administrator.

The Translations management package comes with two types of translation services:

> - REST API-based providers call a translation service such as Google Translate or DeepL directly by using an API key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **REST API-based providers** - call a translation service such as Google Translate or DeepL directly by using an API key
```

> - AI-based providers send translation requests through the [AI Actions](configure_ai_actions.md) framework, relying on the same model selection and policy controls as other AI features in [[= product_name =]].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **AI-based providers** - send translation requests through the [AI Actions](configure_ai_actions.md) framework, relying on the same model selection and policy controls as other AI features in [[= product_name =]]
```

!!! note "Prerequisites for the default translation providers"

>     Before you can configure translation providers, you must fulfill the following prerequisites:

Reviewer 2: Personal choice, sounds more natural.
```suggestion
    Before you can configure translation providers, you need to meet the following prerequisites:
```

    - For the REST API-based translation providers, add API keys that you obtain from the machine translation services to the `.env` file in the root directory of your project.
    - For the AI-based translation providers, [configure AI Actions and the corresponding connectors](configure_ai_actions.md).

Out of the box, Translations management can support the following translation providers:

| Provider | Type |
|---|---|
| Google Translate | REST API |
| DeepL | REST API |
| OpenAI | AI Actions |
| Anthropic (Claude) | AI Actions |
| Google Gemini | AI Actions |

### Built-in AI providers

> If you fulfill the above prerequisites, and you install the Translations management package, the installation process automatically creates AI [Action Configurations](extend_ai_actions.md#action-configurations) for OpenAI (`auto_translate_openai`), Google Gemini (`auto_translate_gemini`), and Anthropic Claude (`auto_translate_anthropic`).

Reviewer 2: Same as previously.
```suggestion
If you meet the above prerequisites, and you install the Translations management package, the installation process automatically creates AI [Action Configurations](extend_ai_actions.md#action-configurations) for OpenAI (`auto_translate_openai`), Google Gemini (`auto_translate_gemini`), and Anthropic Claude (`auto_translate_anthropic`).
```

The `actionConfigurationIdentifier` values must reference existing Action Configurations.
If a value is missing or empty, the provider doesn't appear in the UI as a selectable option.

#### Advanced translation provider options

In addition to their required authentication keys, all providers support two optional ones:

- `supportedLanguageCodes` - overrides the default list of language codes that this provider accepts
- `languageCodesMap` - maps language codes used by [[= product_name =]], for example, `eng-GB`, to the provider-specific codes the API expects

REST API-based providers come with their own language code lists and mappings, therefore both settings are optional.
If configured, they replace the built-in defaults, so use them to restrict available languages or override mappings.

!!! tip "Default values"

    To check the built-in defaults for the existing providers, run:

    ``` bash
    php bin/console debug:container --parameters | grep ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider
    ```

    The output lists the default `supported_language_codes` and `language_codes_map` values for each configured provider, which you can use as a reference.

>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

AI-based providers don't provide built-in language code lists or mappings.
If `supportedLanguageCodes` is not configured, all enabled languages are used, converted to POSIX format.
If `languageCodesMap` is not configured, the system automatically tries to match [[= product_name =]] language codes to the one supported by the provider by trying different format variants, for example, `eng-GB`, `en-GB`, or `en`.
If no match is found, an `UnsupportedLanguageException` is thrown at runtime.

> Therefore, for AI-based providers, it is recommended that you explicitly configure both options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, for AI-based providers, it's recommended that you explicitly configure both options.
```

The editor can override the pre-selection.

The list of languages available when creating a language pair is determined by what each provider supports.
You can only select the languages that are present in a provider's [supported list](#advanced-translation-provider-options) for that provider's pairs.

You [manage language pairs in the back office]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#manage-translation-services-and-language-pairs).

## Side-by-side translation view

The [side-by-side translation view]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#side-by-side-translation-view) is a two-column content editing interface where the source column is read-only and the target column is an editable form.

Content types that contain the `ibexa_landing_page` or `ibexa_form` fields can't be opened in the side-by-side translation view.
Editors can open them in the standard single-language editor.

You can exclude the support for additional content types if needed.
To do it, [define custom exclusion rules](extend_translations_management.md#define-custom-exclusion-rules).

!!! note "Meta fields"

>     Fields marked with [`meta: true`](content_tab_switcher.md#add-meta-tab) and fields that belong to groups listed in [`admin_ui_forms.content_edit.meta_field_groups_list`](content_tab_switcher.md#configure-field-groups-for-meta-tab) are not rendered in the side-by-side translation view.

Reviewer 2: For consistency with "isn't".
```suggestion
    Fields marked with [`meta: true`](content_tab_switcher.md#add-meta-tab) and fields that belong to groups listed in [`admin_ui_forms.content_edit.meta_field_groups_list`](content_tab_switcher.md#configure-field-groups-for-meta-tab) aren't rendered in the side-by-side translation view.
```

For a description of the side-by-side view and its functions from the editor's perspective, see [User Documentation]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#side-by-side-translation-view).

### User settings

The Translations management package adds preferences that editors can configure under their [user settings]([[= user_doc =]]/getting_started/get_started/#user-settings).

> Each editor can configure them independently, and they do not affect other users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each editor can configure them independently, and they don't affect other users.
```

For example, editors can choose whether the target language column appears on the left or right in the side-by-side translation view.
By default, the target is on the right, and each editor can override this default.

You can change the system-wide default in configuration:

``` yaml
ibexa:
    system:
        default:
            translations_management:

>                 default_side_by_side_column_order: 'source_left_target_right'

Reviewer: This is (correctly) detected as invalid on CI:
https://github.com/ibexa/documentation-developer/actions/runs/32296302631/job/96208269989?pr=3249

```
[3](https://github.com/ibexa/documentation-developer/actions/runs/32296302631/job/96208269989?pr=3249#step:7:174)

1) Ibexa\Tests\Documentation\Yaml\YamlTest::testBundleConfigurationIsValid with data set "ibexa (docs/multisite/translations_management/configure_translations_management.md:231)" ('ibexa', [[[['source_left_target_right']]]], 'docs/multisite/translations_m...ent.md', 231, '8148065dc25791f88098cbdabdbd5...db7d04')
Invalid configuration for "ibexa" in docs/multisite/translations_management/configure_translations_management.md:231 [hash:8148065dc25791f88098cbdabdbd5f4caa2b4e5e12b2bce11022c8e586db7d04] — Unrecognized option "default_side_by_side_column_order" under "ibexa.system.default.translations_management". Available option is "auto_translate".
```

Because this configuration is not site-access aware, it's a container parameter - https://github.com/ibexa/translations-management/blob/5.0/src/bundle/DependencyInjection/IbexaTranslationsManagementExtension.php#L35-L40

```suggestion
parameters:
    ibexa.site_access.config.default.translations_management.default_side_by_side_column_order: source_right_target_left
```

    Edit the existing language pair instead. 

## Manage language pairs programmatically

To manage language pairs programmatically, create a service class and inject `LanguagePairServiceInterface` into its constructor.
Symfony autowires it automatically so no manual service configuration is needed.

``` php hl_lines="2"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/TranslationPairManager.php', 14, 35) =]]
```

The service exposes the following methods:

| Method | Description |
|---|---|
| `createLanguagePair()` | Create a new language pair. Pass `true` as the fourth argument to overwrite an existing pair with the same source and target. |
| `updateLanguagePair()` | Update an existing language pair by ID. |
| `syncLanguagePairsForSourceAndProvider()` | Synchronize all target languages for a given source language and provider. |
| `loadLanguagePairs()` | Load all configured language pairs. |
| `deleteLanguagePairById()` | Delete a language pair by ID. |
| `deleteLanguagePairsForProvider()` | Delete all language pairs associated with a given provider. |

> 

Reviewer 3: IMO, this should be dropped because `LanguagePairServiceInterface` is not a contract and should not be exposed as example to manage Language Pairs outside of the translations management bundle.

## User settings

The Translations management package adds preferences that editors can configure under their [user settings](getting_started/get_started/#browsing).
Each editor can configure them independently, and they do not affect other users.

For example, editors can choose whether the target language column appears on the left or right in the side-by-side view.
By default, the target is on the right, and each editor can override this default.

You can change the system-wide default in configuration:

``` yaml
ibexa:
    system:
        default:
            translations_management:
                default_side_by_side_column_order: 'source_left_target_right'
```

The accepted values are `source_left_target_right` (default) and `source_right_target_left`.

## Side-by-side translation view

The [side-by-side translation view]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#side-by-side-translation-view) is a two-column content editing interface where the source column is read-only and the target column is an editable form.

> Content types that contain the `ibexa_landing_page` or `ibexa_form` fields are not supported, and editors can open them in the standard single-language editor only.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should to clarify that excluding a content type from the side-by-side view does not make it untranslatable. Landing Page and other excluded content types can still be auto-translated through the standard translation flow and the CLI command - only the side-by-side editing interface is unavailable for them.

Editors have multiple ways to arrive at the side-by-side translation view, for example:

- From the **Create a new translation** modal, by clicking the **Open side-by-side** action.
    This submits the modal to the `ibexa.translations_management.side_by_side_create` route, which creates a new draft and redirects to `side_by_side_view` with the resolved `versionNo`.

- From the **Versions** tab, by clicking the **Edit side-by-side** action next to a draft whose source and target languages differ.
    This doesn't create a new draft, and the existing version number is used.

!!! tip "Routes"

    The Translations management package registers internal back office routes.
    To list them with their current paths, run:

    ``` bash
    php bin/console debug:router | grep translations_management
    ```

### Side-by-side view functions

The side-by-side translation view has several functions, including:

- Copy all from source

When an editor clicks the **Copy all from source** action, all translatable field values are copied from the source to target column.
It's a single server-side operation handled by `SideBySideFieldCopyService::copyAllFields()` after which the view is reloaded.

> 

Reviewer 3: We should consider to add new section: Review of automatic translations or something similar. 

When a draft is created with automatic translation, it's marked for review. Editors accept or reject the result. - This could point to example from user documentation with snack back contains actions.

- Draft conflict warning

When an user opens the translation modal and selects a target language which already has a draft translation, a warning appears in the modal.

> The warning is shown or hidden dynamically by `side-by-side-translation-modal-warning.js` when the user changes the target language selection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The warning is shown or hidden dynamically by `add.translation.modal.warning.js` when the user changes the target language selection.
```

---

> description: Install translations management configure translation providers, language pairs, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Install translations management and configure translation providers, language pairs, and more.
```

edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Configure translations management

`ibexa/translations-management` extends [[= product_name =]]'s built-in language management tools that editors use for content item and product translation.

> It introduces a plugin that handles automatic translations through the translation provider system by connecting to REST APIs and AI services, a [side-by-side editing interface](#side-by-side-translation-view) where editors can compare source and target , provide content item and product translations in a single view, and reject or approve translations, and multiple extension points that you can use to [customize different areas of the translation workflow](extend_translations_management.md).

Reviewer: This sentence is pretty long, can it be split into multiple ones?

This part:

```
[side-by-side editing interface](#side-by-side-translation-view) where editors can compare source and target , provide content item and product translations in a single view, and reject or approve translations, and multiple extension points that you can use to [customize different areas of the translation workflow](extend_translations_management.md).
```

is where I got lost reading this. How about something like this? 

``` suggestion
It introduces a plugin that handles automatic translations through the translation provider system by connecting to REST APIs and AI services.
By using the new [side-by-side editing interface](#side-by-side-translation-view), editors can compare source and target values, provide content item and product translations in a single view, and reject or approve translations.
Multiple extension points exist that you can use to [customize different areas of the translation workflow](extend_translations_management.md).
```

> It introduces a plugin that handles automatic translations through the translation provider system by connecting to REST APIs and AI services, a [side-by-side editing interface](#side-by-side-translation-view) where editors can compare source and target , provide content item and product translations in a single view, and reject or approve translations, and multiple extension points that you can use to [customize different areas of the translation workflow](extend_translations_management.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It introduces a plugin that handles automatic translations through the translation provider system by connecting to REST APIs and AI services, a [side-by-side editing interface](#side-by-side-translation-view) where editors can compare source and target, provide content item and product translations in a single view, and reject or approve translations, and multiple extension points that you can use to [customize different areas of the translation workflow](extend_translations_management.md).
```

!!! note "Automatic translation limitations"

>     Content types that contain the `ibexa_form` or `ibexa_landing_page` fields do not support the side-by-side translation view and open in the single-language editor instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Content types that contain the `ibexa_form` or `ibexa_landing_page` fields don't support the side-by-side translation view and open in the single-language editor instead.
```

    When a content type that uses `ibexa_landing_page` is automatically translated, only the page's title and description are translated.

>     When a content type that uses `ibexa_form` is automatically translated, only the forms's title is translated.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be reversed to say:

The value of `ibexa_landing_page` field type is not translated.
The value of `ibexa_form` field type is not translated.

Thinking about a case there someone configures their Landing Page to have different fields than title or description.

>     Also, [product attributes](products.md#product-attributes) are not translatable.

Reviewer: It's a good mention, but it's not a limitation of automatic translation - product attributes are not translatable by design: https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/product_catalog/products/#product-attributes:~:text=Attribute%20translations

I'd think about rewording this somehow - as it's not a limitation of automatic translation.

## Install package

To install the Translations management [LTS Update](editions.md#lts-updates), run the following command:

```bash
composer require ibexa/translations-management
```

If you're installing Translations management LTS Update as part of the installation process of a fresh [[= product_name =]] instance, this step copies the migration files into the project's migrations directory, creates the database tables required for the review workflow, and adds the default action configurations in the database.
Otherwise follow the steps below.

### Existing installations

> To add the Translations management LTS Update to an existing [[= product_name =]] instance, after installation, you must create database tabes and action configurations yourself.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To add the Translations management LTS Update to an existing [[= product_name =]] instance, after installation, you must create database tables and action configurations yourself.
```

#### Modify database schema

Add the tables needed by the bundle:

=== "MySQL"

    ```sql

>     [[= include_file('code_samples/translations_management/install/schema.mysql.sql', 0, None, '    ') =]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/install/schema.mysql.sql', indent_level=1) =]]
```

    ```

=== "PostgreSQL"

    ```sql

>     [[= include_file('code_samples/translations_management/install/schema.postgresql.sql', 0, None, '    ') =]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/install/schema.postgresql.sql', indent_level=1) =]]
```

    ```

The script creates the required data structures, but doesn't add any data to the database.

#### Add action configurations

Import and run the AI Action Configuration migrations to complete the setup:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Should all of these be executed, or only the ones for which the needed AI connector (openai, gemini, antrophic) is installed?

php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_06_15_00_auto_translate_openai_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_11_10_00_auto_translate_gemini_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:import vendor/ibexa/translations-management/src/bundle/Resources/migrations/2026_05_12_08_30_auto_translate_anthropic_action_configuration.yaml
php bin/console ibexa:migrations:migrate
```

## Configure translation providers

Translation providers are the services that perform the actual text translation.

>     If you fail to configure them, the automatic translation feature is disabled in the editor's UI, and a message is displayed that prompts the user to contact the administrator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you fail to configure them, the automatic translation feature is disabled in the editor's UI, and a message is displayed that prompts the user to contact the administrator
```

The Translations management package comes with two types of translation services:

- REST API-based providers call a translation service such as Google Translate or DeepL directly by using an API key.
- AI-based providers send translation requests through the [AI Actions](configure_ai_actions.md) framework, relying on the same model selection and policy controls as other AI features in [[= product_name =]].

!!! note "Prerequisites for the default translation providers"

    Before you can configure translation providers, you must fulfill the following prerequisites:

    - For the REST API-based translation providers, add API keys that you obtain from the machine translation services to the `.env` file in the root directory of your project.

>     - For the AI-based translation providers, [install and configure](configure_ai_actions.md) the `ibexa/connector-ai` package and their corresponding connectors.

Reviewer: In v5 AI connector is installed by default - only configuration is left.

```suggestion
    - For the AI-based translation providers, [configure AI Actions](configure_ai_actions.md) and the corresponding connectors.
```

ibexa:
    system:
        default:
            translations_management:
                auto_translate:
                    providers:
                        google:
                            apiKey: '%env(GOOGLE_TRANSLATE_API_KEY)%'
                        deepl:
                            apiKey: '%env(DEEPL_API_KEY)%'
                        openai:
                            actionConfigurationIdentifier: 'auto_translate_openai'
                        anthropic:
                            actionConfigurationIdentifier: 'auto_translate_anthropic'
                        gemini:
                            actionConfigurationIdentifier: 'auto_translate_gemini'
```

The `apiKey` values must reference API key values that you added to the `.env` file.
The `actionConfigurationIdentifier` values must reference existing Action Configurations.
If a value is missing or empty, the provider doesn't appear in the UI as a selectable option.

#### Advanced translation provider options

In addition to their required authentication keys, all providers support two optional ones:

- `supportedLanguageCodes` - overrides the default list of language codes that this provider accepts

> - `languageCodesMap` - maps language codes used by [[= product_name =]], for example, `eng-GB`, to the provider-specific codes the API expects

Reviewer: Are there any defaults that people should know?

If I skip these properties, are all languages supported? Is there a default languageCodesMap, or is the Ibexa-specific languageCode sent to the service?

Are the built-in providers smart enough to work without this config, or is it in practice required to set this?

Author: I am adding a paragraph to describe the behavior.

!!! note "Identifier normalization"

    Provider identifiers are normalized from hyphens to underscores during configuration processing.
    Use one format consistently.
    If you mix `my-provider` and `my_provider` for the same provider, it results in an exception.

## Define language pairs

Language pair definitions decide which provider handles each source-to-target language combination by default.
For example, you can decide that English to French translations should use DeepL.
When an editor [opens the translation modal]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#add-new-translation) and selects a matching language combination, the provider that you chose is pre-selected in the dropdown.
The editor can override the pre-selection.

The list of languages available when creating a language pair is determined by what each provider supports.
You can only select the languages that are present in a provider's [supported list](#advanced-translation-provider-options) for that provider's pairs.

You [manage language pairs in the back office]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#manage-translation-services-and-language-pairs).

> ## User settings

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be under side-by-side header?

To introduce the widget first, and only then describe the settings for it?

For example, editors can choose whether the target language column appears on the left or right in the side-by-side view.
By default, the target is on the right, and each editor can override this default.

You can change the system-wide default in configuration:

``` yaml
ibexa:
    system:
        default:
            translations_management:
                default_side_by_side_column_order: 'source_left_target_right'
```

The accepted values are `source_left_target_right` (default) and `source_right_target_left`.

## Side-by-side translation view

The [side-by-side translation view]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#side-by-side-translation-view) is a two-column content editing interface where the source column is read-only and the target column is an editable form.

Content types that contain the `ibexa_landing_page` or `ibexa_form` fields can't be opened in the side-by-side translation view.
Editors can open them in the standard single-language editor.

You can exclude the support for additional content types if needed.
To do it, [define custom exclusion rules](extend_translations_management.md#define-custom-exclusion-rules).

> ### Architecture

Reviewer: Should this really be part of "Configure Translations management"?

Feels out of place here.

Only this feels worth mentioning, but paraphrased to avoid mentioning the builder:

```
 The builder excludes the fields that are marked marked as `meta: true` or belong to a field group that is listed in `admin_ui_forms.content_edit.meta_field_groups_list`, and does not render them.
```

As this is the only thing related to configuration.

And it feels that linking to https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/administration/back_office/content_tab_switcher/#add-meta-tab and 
https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/administration/back_office/content_tab_switcher/#configure-field-groups-for-meta-tab is beneficial here, for more info about this.

> ### Architecture

Reviewer: The three "out of place" paragraphs (Architecture, Side-by-side view behavior, Side-by-side view functions) read as an AI-generated summary of how the feature works - they don't belong to the "Configure..." article, and I don't see the usefulness of them in general.

The side-by-side view consists of three forms placed in a single Twig template:

- `view.sourcePreviewForm` — the source language content, rendered as read-only fields
- `view.form` — the target language content, rendered as editable fields
- `view.copyAllForm` — the **Copy all from source** action

To assemble the view, `SideBySideEditContextBuilder` performs the following actions:

1. Resolves source and target languages
2. Loads the correct content version
3. Groups fields by their content type field groups

!!! note "Meta fields"

    The builder excludes the fields that are marked marked as `meta: true` or belong to a field group that is listed in `admin_ui_forms.content_edit.meta_field_groups_list`, and does not render them.

To resolve the column order, `SideBySideTargetLanguagePositionResolver` reads the user setting and falls back to `source_left_target_right` when the setting is not made.
The Twig template applies `order-xl-*` classes for responsive column placement.

### Side-by-side view behavior

> Editors have multiple ways to arrive at the side-by-side translation view, for example:

Reviewer: This also is out of place.

- From the **Create a new translation** modal, by clicking the **Open side-by-side** action.
    This submits the modal to the `ibexa.translations_management.side_by_side_create` route, which creates a new draft and redirects to `side_by_side_view` with the resolved `versionNo`.

- From the **Versions** tab, by clicking the **Edit side-by-side** action next to a draft whose source and target languages differ.
    This doesn't create a new draft, and the existing version number is used.

!!! tip "Routes"

    The Translations management package registers internal back office routes.
    To list them with their current paths, run:

    ``` bash
    php bin/console debug:router | grep translations_management
    ```

> ### Side-by-side view functions

Reviewer: This also is out of place.

The side-by-side translation view has several functions, including:

- Copy all from source

When an editor clicks the **Copy all from source** action, all translatable field values are copied from the source to target column.
It's a single server-side operation handled by `SideBySideFieldCopyService::copyAllFields()` after which the view is reloaded.

- Draft conflict warning

When an user opens the translation modal and selects a target language which already has a draft translation, a warning appears in the modal.
The warning is shown or hidden dynamically by `add.translation.modal.warning.js` when the user changes the target language selection.

For a description of the side-by-side view and its functions from the user's perspective, see [Translate content](([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#side-by-side-translation-view).

> ## Translate content items with CLI

Reviewer: I'd extract this from the "Configure..." article - it could even be a separate article imho

For the purposes of batch processing, automation and other scripted actions, the Translations management package exposes a command that translates content items by using any of the configured providers:

``` bash
php bin/console ibexa:translations:auto-translate-content \
    --content-id=42 \
    --provider=deepl \
    --from=eng-GB \
    --to=fre-FR
```

!!! tip "Command alias"

    You can use `ibexa:translations:translate-content` as an alias.

> The command uses the same provider configuration and field value transformers as the UI, so the results are the same if an editor triggered the translation manually.

Reviewer: I haven't reviewed the user doc yet, so this comment is a bit blind - is the result really the same? I think an editor triggering the translation ends up with a draft to review, running this one publishes the result immediately - which sounds like a substantial difference (the example doesn't use `--draft-only`)

Author: Yes, you are right, it is an oversimplification - the translation result is the same but not a technical result. The result CAN BE the same under certain conditions, not IS the same. Let me rewrite that.

### CLI command options

| Option | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `--content-id` | Yes | ID of the content item to translate |
| `--provider` | Yes | Identifier of the translation provider to use |
| `--from` | Yes | Source language code |
| `--to` | Yes | Target language code |
| `--user-id` | No | Repository user ID to run the translation (default: `14`, which is the Administrator user) |
| `--draft-only` | No | Create a translated draft without publishing it |

> ## Translation review

Reviewer: This workflow doesn't seem configurable, can we find a better place to describe this than the "Configure..." article?

Author: I've merged it with the paragraph in the product guide

> When a draft translation of a content item or product is created by going through the automatic translation process, the system creates a review status record and marks the draft `for_review`.

Reviewer: This one doesn't mention that CLI does not trigger it.

Author: I need to check on that

Author: Indeed, I updated the description (which moved to the product guide btw)

This way editors and reviewers can check whether automatically translated drafts have been checked before publishing.

> Automatically translated drafts can have one of the following two states:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automatically translated drafts can have one of the following two states:

```
Markdownlint (blank lines before lists)

---
description: Install translations management configure translation providers, language pairs, and more.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Configure translations management

> `ibexa/translations-management` extends [[= product_name =]]'s built-in language management tools that editors use for content translation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`ibexa/translations-management` extends [[= product_name =]]'s built-in language management tools that editors use for content item and product translation.
```

It introduces a plugin that handles the translation provider system by connecting to REST APIs and AI services, a [side-by-side editing interface](#side-by-side-translation-view) where editors can compare source and target languages and provide content item and product translations in a single view, and multiple extension points that you can use to [customize different areas of the translation workflow](extend_translations_management.md).

> The package is standalone and does not require the `ibexa/automated-translation` add-on package to run.

Reviewer 3: IMO we should not mention anything about `ibexa/automated-translation`, but if we want to, please write that `ibexa/translations-management` replaces  `ibexa/automated-translation`.

!!! note "Automatic translation limitations"

>     Content types that contain the `ibexa_form` field are excluded from automatic translation.

Reviewer 3: This is false information. Content type `ibexa_form` is excluded from Side by Side view, but still can be translated via regular flow. If someone wants to translate `ibexa_form` they will need to implement their own ValueTransformer. OOTB we don't added support for this content type because we don't know each structure of forms and data.

- AI-based providers send translation requests through the [AI Actions](configure_ai_actions.md) framework, relying on the same model selection and policy controls as other AI features in [[= product_name =]].

Out of the box, Translations management can support the following translation providers:

| Provider | Type | Configuration |
|---|---|---|
| Google Translate | REST API | API key |
| DeepL | REST API | API key |
| OpenAI | AI Actions | Action Configuration identifier |
| Anthropic (Claude) | AI Actions | Action Configuration identifier |
| Google Gemini | AI Actions | Action Configuration identifier |

!!! note "Prerequisites for the default translation providers"

    Before you can configure translation providers, you must fulfill the following prerequisites:

    - For the REST API-based translation providers, add API keys that you obtain from the machine translation services to the `.env` file in the root directory of your project.

    - For the AI-based translation providers, [install and configure](configure_ai_actions.md) the `ibexa/connector-ai` package and their corresponding connectors.

**Built-in AI providers**

> When you install the Translations management package, the installation process automatically creates AI [Action Configurations](extend_ai_actions.md#action-configurations) for OpenAI (`auto_translate_openai`), Google Gemini (`auto_translate_gemini`), and Anthropic Claude (`auto_translate_anthropic`).

Reviewer 3: Missing information that Translations management not install connectors packages, so if we want to use AI providers we must first install the appropriate packages.

Author: One paragraph above I am listing prerequisites. But I will adjust the sentence according to your suggestion.
